---
title: Hash Tables
description: "more like crash tables (because of collisions)"
date: "2020-03-05"
template: "post"
draft: false 
category: "2402"
socialImage: "/media/image-2.jpg"
---

A hash table is a data structure that uses some hash function to associate any given piece of data to a space in memory

### Collisions

Collisions occur when two items yield the same hash function. This is is a problem. This can be dealt with in multiple ways including with a 

### Chained Hash Table

a data structure that uses hashing with chaining to store data as an array t of lists. 
```java
List<T>[] t;
int n //the number of items in the chained hash table
```
> Hash Value: the value in the range of $\{0... $t.length $ - 1\}$. in a chained hash table all items with hash value i are stored in the array $t[i]$

in order to ensure that chained hash tables don't get too big they are maintained such that $n \le $ t.length. This is so the average num of elemnt

```java
boolean add(T x) {
  if (find(x) != null) return false; // if x x is already in the hash table don't add it (uset)
  if (n + 1 > t.length) resize()
  t[hash(x)].add(x); // add the item to the hash location bucket
  n++;
  return true
}

T remove(T x) {
  Iterator<T> it = t[hash(x)].iterator(); // create iterator
  while (it.hasNext()){
    T y = it.next(); // pretty easy
    if (y.equals(x)) {
      it.remove();
      n--;
      return y;
    }
  }
  return null;
}
```
removing takes $O(n_{\text{hash}(x)})$ time where $n_i$ is the length of the bucket list at $t[i]$

```java
T find(Object x) {
  for (T y: t[hash(x)]) //for each element in the bucket
    if (y.equals(x))
      return y;
    return null;
}
```

This takes a time proportional to the bucket size. 

## The Hash Function

the performance of a hash table depends critically on the choice of a hash function. a good function will spread elements evenly, such that the expected size of each bucket is $O(n/t$.length $)=O(1)$. a bad hash function will put all the values into the same bucket.

# Multiplicative Hashing

multiplicative hashing is based on modular arithmetic and integer division

> the **div** opeerator calculates the integral part of a quotient while discarding the remainder. basically $a \text{ div } b = \lfloor{a/b}\rfloor$

In multiplicative hashing a table of size $2^d$ is where $d$ is the dimension of the table. a randomly chosen odd integer $z \in \{1,...,2^w - 1\}$ is chosen alongside the number of bits in an int $w$ to hash each object $x \in \{0,...,2^w - 1\}$

$$ hash(x) = ((z\cdot x) \mod 2^w) \text{div} 2^{w -d}$$

or 

$$ hash(k) = ((2\cdot x \cdot hashcode) \mod 2^w) div 2^{wd} $$

this can be simplified to code with 

```java
int hash(Object x) {
  return (z * x.hashcode()) >>> (w * d);
}
```

universal hashing : $Pr(hash(x) == hash(y)) = 1/t.length$

(multi) near universal hashing: $Pr(hash(x) == hash(y)) \le 2/t.length$

#### Lemma 1

$z$ - is a random odd integer

Let S be the set of odd integers in $\{ 1... 2^w - 1\}$. Let $q$ and $i$ be any two elements in $S$. Then there is exactly one value $z \in S$ such that $2q\mod 2^w = i$

example
$ q = 7, z = 3$

$ z \cdot q = 2\mod 16$

$ i = 5$

##### why is z odd?
example

$$ 
q = 5, z = 3
$$
$$
z = 01000
$$

$$ 
z \cdot 10 = 10000
$$

$$
\text{hash the following } 
$$

$$
11100
$$

$$
11000
$$

$$
10100
$$

$$
\text{let } q = 111000
$$

$$
z*q \mod 2^5 = 00000
$$

_the number of trailing 0's in two bit numbers will be the number of trailing zeros when they are multiplied_
_z has to be odd (if it's even multiplicative hashing breaks down)_

#### Lemma 2: For data value x, the expected (average/mean) length of the $list + [hash(x)]$ is at most $n_x + 2$ where $n_x$ is the number of occurerences of x.

Let $S$ be the set of all elements $\not= x $ stored in our hash table

for y $\in$ S $I_y$ = { 1  if  hash(x) = hash(y),  0  otherwises }

**understand this**
$$\
E[\Sigma_{y \in s}I_y] 
$$
$$
= \Sigma_{y \in s} \mathbb [I_y] 
$$
$$
= \Sigma_{y \in s} (2/ t.length)
$$
$$
\le \Sigma_{y\in s} 2/n
$$
$$
= \dfrac{2(n - nx)}{n} 
$$
$$
= 2n/n - 2nx/n
$$
$$
= 2 - 2nx/n
$$
$$
\le 2
$$

**If  $hash(x) = hash(y)$ and $x\not=y$  then the $d$ highest bits of $z \cdot x \mod 2^w$ and $z \cdot y \mod 2^w$ are the same**
$$
z \cdot mod 2^w - z\cdot y \mod 2^w
$$
$z \cdot (x - y) \mod 2^w $ the highest d bits are all 0's or all 1's
maybe: the number of trailing zeros in the bit representation mean that there is a $\dfrac{2}{2^d}$ chance of a collision
